A blockchain is a shared, distributed and permanent database shared among multiple nodes on a computer network.
They record data in a way that makes it probabilistically impossible to modify or hack the system.

Blockchains record data as a chain of blocks. Each block contains a group of transactions, which could be transfering assets around the network or 
updating the information stored on the blockchain.

Blockchain were popularized by the anonymous persion or group "Satoshi Nakamoto, when they released the Bitcoin Network in 2008.
Bitcoin is a cryptocurrency network and it handles primarily the transfer of the BTC asset acreoss the network,
without a trusted middleman or authority, while ensuring the network itself is secure and cannot be hacked.

Bitcoin inspired other, more capable, blockchain networks to come out like Ethereum.


** State Management:

Genesis state --transactions--> State 1 --transactions--> State 2 ..... State n.

Blockchain start off with a Genesis State when they launch. Bitcoin genesis state happened in "2009" when the public network launched.
Ethereum's Genesis state happened in "2015", when it launched.

Every transaction on a blockchain modifies the global state that is replicated across all nodes.

Block 1 <----- Block 2 <---- ..... <---- Block N 
Header         Header                    Header
Transactions   Transactions              Transactions

Since there are millions of transactions, transactions get grouped together in blocks.
These blocks are chained together in a cryptographically verifiable way so they are historically traceable.
The currect state of the network can be recalculated at any time by starting from
the genesis block and transitioning the state according to each block's information up until now.


** Nodes:

A blockchain network is managed autonomously through a peer-to-peer distributed network of computer nodes.
Each node in the network keeps a copy of the global transcation ledger. 
So that each node can individually verify and audit transactions happening on the network ensuring no illicit behavior.

A "mining node" is responsible for grouping together new transactions being made on a network into a block.
And proposing the block to be included onto the global ledger by everyone else.
Mining is computationally hard, and very important to do securely, so miners whose
blocks are accepted are given a token reward for their hard work.

The use of a blockchain confirms that each unit value was transferred only once.
and the ingenious mechanisms put forth by satoshi nakamoto solved the long-standing decentralized double-spending problem.

"Double-Spending" --> Check out this link to learn more (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double-spending).


** Decentralization:

By storing the data in a peer-to-peer network of nodes, the blockchain is a decentralized network.
This has significant benefits over the traditional approach of storing data in a centralized manner.

Significant examples of problems with centralization:
1. Data breaches in centralized systems expose lot of data.
2. Centralized authorities can censor and shut down speech.
3. Reliance on a central authority means upstream problems affect downstream consumers.
e.g. AWS doing down means most of the internet goes down with it.

Benefits:
1. No censorship as there is no single authority or middleman that can censor you.
2. No downtime as the overall network is running across 1000's of nodes across the globe.
3. Highly attack resistant making it infeasible to manipulate or destroy data.

Use Cases:
1. Cryptocurrency.
2. Smart Contracts.
3. Decentralized Finance.
4. Gaming.
5. Supply Chain Tracking.
6. Counterfeiting Protection.
7. Data Privacy.
8. Decentralized Governance.
9. Verifiable Ownership of assets.
and many more...

