* Web 1 (1980s - early 2000's):-

The first phrase of the internet was mainly about providing the everyday consumer with online content and information.

As a consumer you could only read information or content online, and not interective yet, Web 1 was incredibly static.

When you think about Web1, think about internet Explorer, Yahoo or Netscape.
While web1 was read-only, the companies we associate with web1 were built on open protocols, meaning anyone can built on the internet. 
Same rules were applied to a simple person or organization.


* Web2:-

Web2 is the today's version of the internet. Web2 is "read-write" and interactive.
Under web2, the internet became more usable: web2 was dynamic and users could consume, interact with and create content on the internet themselves.

The internet became largely dominated by the four behemoths we know today as Apple, Amazon, Facebook and Google.
An explosion in the use of smartphones and most of the internet use was through mobile apps and hardware built by these companies.
While this meant more people could participate in the intenet, it also meant the intenet was becoming increasingly controlled by the leading digital platforms.

Why is this a problem?
In the centralized internet we know today, Apple can take a 30% cut on all paid-app downloads and in-app purchases, 
Twitter and facebook can de-platform the POTUS and the everyday consumer has less privacy, security and control over their online information than ever before.

We also see a lot of data breaches happening alla cross web2 leading to reduced security and privacy for one's personal data.
When a user's data gets breached its easy for them to brcome a victim of identify theft, personal attacks etc.


* Web3:-

Web3, the future internet, is a decentralized internet. The internet is shared online and governed by the collective "we", rather than owned by centralized entities.
The web3 world is one that has open-source protocols at its foundation. 
Web3 is about rearchitecting internet services and products so that they benefit people rather than entities.

Web3 enhances the web we know today by making it decentralized, distributed, open, trustless and permissionless.
1. It's getting built such that everything would happen in a decentralized distributed way giving no central authority access to control the system.
2. Open --> Open sourced software built by an open and accessible community of developers and executed in full view of the world.
3. Trustless --> The network itself allows participants to interact publicly or privately without a trusted third party.
4. Permissionless --> Anyone, both users and suppliers, can participate without authorisation from a governing body.


* Readings and references:-

1. https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/what-is-web3/
2. https://www.xenonstack.com/blog/web3-features-and-challenges
3. https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/web2-vs-web3/

